I've been slowly piecing together a possible framework to explain the underlying geometry of the Spiritual realm, both how it's structured and works.  Dalinar and Navani visited Urithiru in the spiritual realm and they walked it's streets, so we know there is some measure of distance in the spiritual realm bound by our normal understanding of space and time.  However, they are also able to move between different slices of the past, so it definitely does not have the same structure we see in locally Euclidean spacetimes.

This will prolly be confusing, but if you have questions let me know.  I'd love to hear what you think:

## the geometry
It appears (to me at least) that *the Spiritual realm is a powerset over our normal 4 dimensional spacetime (3 physical and 1 temporal dimensions) with each subset a contiguous "slice" of that 4 dimensional spacetime connected via Connectional lines* -- both slices that have happened and slices that will happen, but also slices that didn't happen and slices that won't happen.  Probably other components besides Connection like Identity as well, but so far Connection is what we've actually seen directly for travel in the Spiritual realm (I actually suspect Identity may just be a stronger established Connection between your current slice and slices that you feel represent the underlying you -- both slices that have/will happen and slices that didn't/won't happen).  These various Connectional lines would established a metric space over the superset/multiverse of slices and would allow us to measure the distance between any two possible slices of reality within the Cosmere.

*Imagine something like a multiverse of all possibilities with each possible moment branching out from the previous -- but in which branching moments which have more Connection between them are closer together than branching moments with less Connection* -- so that it's faster to travel between slices/snapshots in that multiverse that are more Connected (via experience, perception, probability, etc).  In a multiverse like this it might take 10 times as long to travel to a location 100 years in the past from the current slice you're in than to a slice 10 years in the past.  If you want to travel to a slice set 5 years in the past that didn't happen but had a high probability of happening, then it'd take a little over half the time to get to than the slice 10 years on the past.  A slice that branched off from the "true" path 5 years ago but was highly unlikely to happen would take significantly more time than half to travel to.

## traveling the geometry (like a current through a wire or lightning through the air)
Every time connection is established, it's essentially like laying down another ethernet line between both the slices and specific entities within these slices.  The more wire you lay, the more paths available for you travel between two gives slices -- however, you'd still need to travel through a contiguous set of slices that exist between the slice you're in and the slice you want to go.  Slices that lie on the "true" path will take less resistance to navigate/travel due to the high amounts of Connectional lines laid down while it's happening by those present in the current "true" path (imagine an electric current traveling through a thicker wire)

This also helps explain why Dalinar and Navani (presumably) were able to travel from "true" slice to "true" slice in the past rather than ending up in some crazy version of the past that didn't happen despite not having experienced any path through the intermediate slices themselves (presumably, at least).

When traveling along a path that actually happened (or was perceived to actually happen by those who witnessed it), you get a nice, fat line from moment to moment in addition to the more abstract Connections that represent relationships between entities.  As each witness of this slice will have perceived the situation slightly differently, the "true" path will be fuzzy but it will still be generally easier travel to previous slices that were very close to what actually happened.

Travel into the future would also be possible, but since the events haven't happened the lines of Connection haven't yet been solidified by those living through the events it would both take longer to travel and be harder navigate to a "true" slice 1 year in the future than to a slice 1 year in the past.  When you go backwards in time, you can basically follow the densest lines of Connection from slice to slice (via gradient descent) to locate a specific slice that happened (or was close to happening), but there are only dense lines of connection to the most probable future slices and none established experientially.

## how hoid stores memories in breath
Within this framework, I actually think Hoid stores his memories in the spiritual realm by using investiture (Breath) to fortify the lines of Connection between the events he wants to remember -- and he access those memories by traveling that fortified line along the geodesic  until he reaches the slice that contains the information he needs to recall.  In this framework, it'd take longer for him to recall/extract memories that happened longer in the past from his current slice -- and this travel would be subject to the same limits on how fast information can travel as we see in the other realms.  However, the speed of life is fast as fuck, so it'd seem near instantaneous to travel 10,000 years of "true" slices.

Hoid's memories aren't stored *in* his Breath, but his breath is used *strengthen the Connection* between sequential slices that hold the information he wants to store.  This also provides a mechanism for Taravangian to "remove" those memories by using a ton of investiture to strengthen an alternate path wherein Hoid didn't speak to Odium more than Hoid's Breath strengthened the slices of the "true" historical past.

## how taravangian established kharbranth in the spiritual realm
I think this framework has interesting implications for how Taravangian established Kharbranth in the Spiritual realm.  I imagine he had to search for a very faint path wherein Kharbranth was accidentally swallowed by a physical/cognitive realm portal and then he used his access to seemingly endless investiture to strengthen the lines of Connection so that the shortest path to the "true" historical path for the people of Khabranthians was via this new line he established -- basically diverting the river of Connectional lines their Identity follows to the previously highly implausible (yet possible) Kharbranth in the Spiritual Realm. It must have taken him quite a bit of time and effort to locate an appropriate slice, even being a (lowercase) god.

### does this make sense or am i crazy?
