As someone who spent the first 33 years of their life as a non-believer (a significant portion much more militant than any of the quorum participants), I found the discussion in church today very familiar.  Not just in having shared positions with every single one of them in my past, but also in how much kinship I find with them still today.  I figured it might add some value to the discussion to share how I've managed to find a relationship with God despite how much of them I still see in myself today.

Each one of the participants represented a different stage I've had in my life, and, despite the differences, there are a few key foundational whispers they share -- whispers I now attribute to the silent tug of the Holy Spirit, although it was a long journey to get here.  I grew up in a religious, church-going family (grandfather was a UMC pastor), but like Matt I have no memory of ever really *believing* what I grew up with.  I couldn't figure out why the stories I was taught didn't match what I saw with my eyes and couldn't find an objective anchor point to justify belief in those stories over any of the other storied religious traditions out there.  And, just as Matt alluded to, every time I asked a question I was beat over the head with appeals to authority and dogma -- dogma I couldn't even find justified in the authority being appealed to (the bible).  Just like Matt, I was a boy very much looking for a deeper truth that I couldn't define, yet knew it wasn't the "you must believe in angels & demons and heaven & hell and virgin birth & bodily resurrection because this one book says it's true" truth.

I was a very bookish kid, though, and it was in 8th grade that I discovered a path (the scientific method) that *could* give me answers -- at least, some of the answers, which was good enough for young me -- and I immediately disavowed higher powers as simple-minded nonsense and spent nearly a decade as a very vocal atheist that didn't trust anything unable to be measured and tested (which wasn't the truth, but was how I perceived my truth).  During this time my worldview was very much similar to Jenny's seems today, if a truth couldn't be quantified and distilled into something I could see "with my own eyes" (despite not actually being my own eyes) then I was hesitant to accept it or give it second thought -- although like Jenny, I had a strong curiosity and draw to studying and discussing religious beliefs.  My bookshelves at the time were full of Dawkins & Hitchens and the Havamal & Hesiod's Theogenies.  I attributed it to pure curiosity back then, but it retrospect that bookshelf (which I still have) was the testament of a young man still looking at not finding -- still under the same silent, persistent tug.  During this time I came across a few things that quietly nagged at me, that ate away at the materialist fortress constructed in my mind, but was able to push to the back of mind for a time (the two that would haunt me the most being William James' utterly reasonable essay "The Will to Believe" and the implication of [Godel's incompleteness theorems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems) that there would always be truths -- real, deep, true truths -- beyond the reach of any purely logical system of belief I could construct from material observation).

After a while I settled into a more quiet identity, like Christine, where I simply didn't think about my personal beliefs one way or another anymore.  It was too routine, I'd already made my bed.  I was still very interested in religion, but it was now centered more on secular studies of religion and, particularly, what the archaeological record said about them.  Beyond that, however, this was a bookshelf era full of self-help books -- I kid you not when I say it felt like each participant represented a different phase in my beliefs.  I still hadn't found the truth I'd been seeking, but was becoming increasingly aware of the limits a "purely" "material" perspective could take you down the path.  So, I instead sought the answer within.  Meditation, exercise, gratitude journals, self-help books -- I did it all, just like Christine.  Meditation, exercise, and journaling (although not "gratitude" journaling) are still part of my routine, they definitely improve my life, they just couldn't stop the nag.

