Good morning Paster Mike,

I intended to write this email a few weeks ago after you gave your sermon about apologetics, but never got around to it.  While listening to a recent episode of the [Huberman Labs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Whe2Jh9q6jI) podcast I realized I should probably actually get around to it.  I suppose while I'm making excuses, I should apologize for how long this email may be -- particularly as an initial message.  Before I start, I want to emphasize that this shouldn't be taken as criticism; I am a huge fan of your sermons, but have a perspective on how the church should minister to non-believers that I think the church could benefit from.

The sermon series on non-believers felt good intentioned but (understandably) misguided in it's conclusions.  Similarly, the approach to apologetics and lines of "argumentation" (I hate using that term here btw) are not building on the necessary foundations to really bring people to Him. I loved the idea of bringing non-believers in to actually discuss their beliefs, it shows a genuine effort to think outside the box and problem solve, but feel the questioning was off target.  I'm reaching out to specifically because I get "kindred spirit" vibes from your sermons that make me think you have a deep seated need to question and seek truth beyond the standard dogma I usually find in church -- which is why I am such a huge fan lol (my notebooks are full of commentary on your sermons which were truly perspective shifting to me).  Particularly relevant to me developing this impression is the way you *always* pull in relevant historical/cultural context during explication, use the tools of literary criticism and metaphor to derive deeper meaning from the text (for ex, "Jesus Bar-Abbas" as a representation of Jewish national identity), and how you are unafraid to take less dogmatic interpretations in sermons (such as how you resolved the "original sin paradox" in Genesis -- the paradox around how eating the fruit could've been a morally sinful act without the ability to understand or identify actions as good or bad).  To me these all seem to paint you as a man truly *searching* for truth, willing to struggle with the text to find cohesion -- necessary qualities when it comes to *constructively* engaging non-believers IMHO.

To add a little context before I start, I've spent the vast majority of my life as either a strict atheist with a couple years at the tail-end in a simple uncaring agnosticism.  The vast majority of my close friends are non-believers as well, so I have a lot of experience in this realm.  I grew up in a religious, church-going family (grandfather was a Methodist pastor), but the earliest memory I have of church is of frustration with a Sunday school teacher unable to explain glaring inconsistencies between the lessons -- inconsistencies I was scolded for and told I just need to accept (not a good approach to take with a contrarian like myself).  By the age of 10 I was a firm atheist; this was in 1998 -- well before atheism became hip -- and I was largely alone and castigated in my non-belief at that time.  It wasn't until after I abandoned Christianity that I found materialist philosophy and the power of science to answer *real* questions -- but once I found it, it became the "validation" I needed that my instincts were not misguided.

TODO: possibly split the below up and move examples around
This email will probably be longer than I want it to be, but I want to start by saying that I don't want this to sound like criticism because it isn't, I just feel like there's some perspective that's missing and feel like I can provide it as someone who spent quite a few years struggling with belief and finding my way to Him.  I am a huge fan of your sermons and am reaching out to you specifically because a lot of what I've heard from you at the pulpit makes me feel like you also have the sort of deep, *questioning* search for truth that I think is important to understand when it comes to bringing in non-believers.  Don't get me wrong because I like the other pastors as well, but both the style and form of your sermons specifically gives me "kindred spirit" vibes -- such as the way you *always* bring in historical/cultural context to provide background and the way you use traditional methods of metaphor/literary criticism in your analysis (one I particularly liked was how you interpreted the name of Jesus Bar-Abbas as representing a relationship to the Jewish nation and it's people).  It makes me feel like there's a *questioning* to you that goes beyond simple dogma and traditional interpretations -- which I think could really help bridge the gap between believers and non-believers.  Another example of this that I really liked was how you resolve the apparent paradox with how eating the fruit is the original sin (how could their actions truly be sinful if they lacked the understanding of right and wrong) by taking the position that it wasn't the act of eating the fruit which was necessarily sinful, but rather served to illustrate the sinful aspect of human nature we'd always had; maybe I read too much into it, but this (almost Eastern Orthodox) interpretation gave me the impression that you spent time struggling with the apparent contradiction in search of the deeper meaning.

I say that all because I think *a lot* Christians tend to show an unwillingness to question and struggle with the Word and it's apparent contradictions -- a tendency which can drive a lot of people to reject religion outright.

1. we shouldn't focus on arguments of logic to justify belief, rather on the fundamental missing *why* that most humans -- including non-believers -- feel pulled towards
2. we need to be accepting of questioning and skepticism and reject dogmatic thinking
3. we need to provide a better framework for understanding how religion and science are orthogonal tools for finding truth
