"Once, long ago and far from here," Hespe said as we sat around the fire
after dinner, "there was a boy named Jax, and he fell in love with the
moon.

"Jax was a strange boy. A thoughtful boy. A lonely boy. He lived in an
old house at the end of a broken road. He---"

Dedan interrupted. "Did you say a *broken* road?"

Hespe's mouth went firm. She didn't scowl exactly, but it looked like
she was getting all the pieces of a scowl together in one place, just in
case she needed them in a hurry. "I did. A broken road. That's how my mother told this
story a hundred times when I was little."

For a minute it looked like Dedan was going to ask another question. But
instead he showed a rare foresight and simply nodded.

Hespe reluctantly put the pieces of her scowl away. Then she looked down
at her hands, frowning. Her mouth moved silently for a moment, then she
nodded to herself and continued.

Everyone who saw Jax could tell there was something different about him.
He didn't play. He didn't run around getting into trouble. And he never
laughed.

Some folk said, "What can you expect of a boy who lives alone in a
broken house at the end of a broken road?" Some said the problem was
that he never had any parents. Some said he had a drop of faerie blood
in him and that kept his heart from ever knowing joy.

He was an unlucky boy. There was no denying that. When he got a new
shirt, he would tear a hole in it. If you gave him a sweet, he would
drop it in the road.

Some said the boy was born under a bad star, that he was cursed, that he
had a demon riding his shadow. Other folks simply felt bad for him, but
not so bad that they cared to help.

One day, a tinker came down the road to Jax's house. This was something
of a surprise, because the road was broken, so nobody ever used it.

"Hoy there, boy!" the tinker shouted, leaning on his stick. "Can you
give an old man a drink?"

Jax brought out some water in a cracked clay mug. The tinker drank and
looked down at the boy. "You don't look happy, son. What's the matter?"

"Nothing is the matter," Jax said. "It seems to me a person needs
something to be happy about, and I don't have any such thing."

Jax said this in a tone so flat and resigned that it broke the tinker's
heart. "I'm betting I have something in my pack that will make you
happy," he said to the boy. "What do you say to that?"

"I'd say that if you make me happy, I'll be grateful indeed," Jax said.
"But I haven't got any money to spend, not a penny to borrow to beg or
to lend."

"Well, that is a problem," said the tinker. "I am in business, you see."

"If you can find something in your pack that will make me happy," Jax
said. "I will give you my house. It's old and broken, but it's worth
something."

The tinker looked up at the huge old house, one short step away from being a mansion. "It
is at that," he said.

Then Jax looked up at the tinker, his small face serious. "And if you
can't make me happy, what then? Will you give me the packs off your
back, the stick in your hand, and the hat off your head?"

Now the tinker was fond of a wager, and he knew a good bet when he heard
one. Besides, his packs were bulging with treasures from all over the
four corners, and he was confident he could impress a small boy. So he
agreed, and the two of them shook hands.

First, the tinker brought out a bag of marbles all the colors of
sunlight. But they didn't make Jax happy. The tinker brought out a ball
and cup. But that didn't make Jax happy.

"*Ball and cup doesn't make anyone happy,*" *Marten muttered.* "*That's
the worst toy ever. Nobody in their right mind enjoys ball and cup.*"

The tinker went through his first pack. It was full of ordinary things
that would have pleased an ordinary boy: dice, puppets, a folding knife,
a rubber ball. But nothing made Jax happy.

So, the tinker moved on to his second pack. It held rarer things. A gear
soldier that marched if you wound him. A bright set of paints with four
different brushes. A book of secrets. A piece of iron that fell from the
sky....

This went on all day and late into the night, and eventually the tinker
began to worry. He wasn't worried about losing his stick. But his packs
were how he made his living, and he was rather fond of his hat.

Eventually, he realized he was going to have to open his third pack. It
was small, and it only had three items in it. But they were things he
only showed to his wealthiest customers. Each was worth much more than a
broken house. But still, he thought, better to lose one than to lose
everything and his hat besides.

Just as the tinker was reaching for his third pack, Jax pointed. "What
is that?"

"Those are spectacles," the tinker said. "They're a second pair of eyes
that help a person see better." He picked them up and settled them onto
Jax's face.

Jax looked around. "Things look the same," he said. Then he looked up.
"What are those?"

"Those are stars," the tinker said.

"I've never seen them before." He turned, still looking up. Then he
stopped stock still. "What is that?"

"That is the moon," the tinker said.

"I think that would make me happy," Jax said.

"Well there you go," the tinker said, relieved. "You have your spectacles...."

"Looking at it doesn't make me happy," Jax said. "No more than looking
at my dinner makes me full. I want it. I want to have it for my own."

"I can't give you the moon," the tinker said. "She doesn't belong to me.
She belongs only to herself."

"Only the moon will do," Jax said.

"Well I can't help you with that," the tinker said with a heavy sigh.
"My packs and everything in them are yours."

Jax nodded, unsmiling.

"And here's my stick. A good sturdy one it is, too."

Jax took it in his hand.

"I don't suppose," the tinker said reluctantly, "that you'd mind leaving
me with my hat? I'm rather fond of it...."

"It's mine by right," Jax said. "If you were fond of it, you shouldn't
have gambled it away." The tinker scowled as he handed over his hat.

*Tempi made a low noise in his throat and shook his head. Hespe smiled
and nodded. Apparently even the Adem know it's bad luck to be rude to a
tinker.*

So Jax settled the hat on his head, took the stick in his hand, and
gathered up the tinker's packs. When he found the third one, still
unopened, he asked, "What's in here?"

"Something for you to choke on," the tinker spat.

"No need to get tetchy over a hat," the boy said. "I have greater need
of it than you. I have a long way to walk if I'm to find the moon and
make her mine."

"But for the taking of my hat, you could have had my help in catching
her," the tinker said.

"I will leave you with the broken house," Jax said. "That is something.
Though it will be up to you to mend it."

Jax put the spectacles on his face and started walking down the road in
the direction of the moon. He walked all night, only stopping when she
went out of sight behind the mountains.

So Jax walked day after day, endlessly searching---

Dedan snorted. "Doesn't that sound just a little too familiar?" he
muttered loud enough for everyone to hear. "I wonder if he was pissing
his time up a tree like we are?"

Hespe glared at him, the muscles in her jaw clenching.

I gave a quiet sigh.

"Are you done?" Hespe asked pointedly, glaring at Dedan for a long moment.

"What?" Dedan asked.

"Shut up while I'm telling my story is what," Hespe said.

"Everyone else had their say!" Dedan climbed to his feet, indignant.
"Even the mute chimed in." He waved a hand at Tempi. "How come I'm the
only one you get hissy at?"

Hespe seethed for a moment, then said. "You're trying to pick a fight
halfway through my story is why."

"Tellin' the truth isn't picking a fight," Dedan grumbled. "Someone
needs to speak some sense around here."

Hespe threw her hands up in the air, "You're still doing it! Can't you
set it down for one evening? Every chance you get you have to bitch and
minge on!"

"At least when I don't agree I speak my mind," Dedan said. "I don't take
the coward's way out."

Hespe's eyes flashed, and despite my better judgment, I decided to jump
in. "Fine," I interrupted, looking at Dedan. "If you've got a better
idea for finding these folk, let's hear it. Let's talk it over like
adults."

My interjection didn't slow Dedan down the least bit. It just pointed
him in my direction. "What would you know about adults?" he said. "I'm
sick and tired of being talked down to by some boy who probably doesn't
even have hair on his balls yet."

"I'm sure if the Maer had known how hairy your balls were, he would have
put you in charge," I said with what I hoped was infuriating calmness.
"Unfortunately, it seems he missed that fact and decided on me instead."

Dedan drew a breath, but Tempi broke in before he could start. "Balls,"
the Adem said curiously. "What is balls?"

All the air went out of Dedan in a rush, and he turned to look at Tempi,
half irritated, half amused. The big mercenary chuckled and made a very
clear motion between his legs with a cupped hand. "You know. Balls," he
said without a trace of self-consciousness.

Behind his back, Hespe rolled her eyes, shaking her head.

"Ah," Tempi said, nodding to show his understanding. "Why is the Maer
looking at hairy balls?"

A pause, then a storm of laughter rolled through our camp, exploding
with all the force of the pent-up tension that had been ready to boil
into a fight. Hespe laughed herself breathless, clutching at her
stomach. Marten wiped tears from his eyes. Dedan laughed so hard he
couldn't stand upright and ended up crouching with one hand on the
ground to steady himself.

By the end of it,everyone was sitting around the fire, breathing hard and grinning like
silly idiots. The tension that had been thick as winter fog was gone for
the first time in days. It was only then that Tempi briefly caught my
eye. His thumb and forefinger rubbed together gently. *Gladness*? No.
*Satisfaction*. Realization dawned on me as I met his eye again. His
expression was blank as always. Studiously blank. So blank it was almost
smug.

"Can we get back to your story, love?" Dedan asked Hespe. "I'd like to
know how this boy gets the moon into bed."

Hespe smiled at him, the first honest smile I'd seen her give Dedan in a
handful of days. "I've lost my place," she said. "There's a rhythm to
it, like a song. I can tell it from the beginning, but if I start
halfway through I'll get it all tangled up in my head."

"Will you start over tomorrow if I promise to keep my mouth shut?"

"I will," she agreed, "if you promise."

...

Jax had no trouble following the moon because in those days the moon was
always full. She hung in the sky, round as a cup, bright as a candle,
all unchanging.

Jax walked for days and days until his feet grew sore. He
[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_591 .pagebreak title="591"}walked for months
and months and his back grew tired beneath his packs. He walked for
years and years and grew up tall and lean and hard and hungry.

When he needed food, he traded out of the tinker's packs. When his shoes
wore thin he did the same. Jax made his own way, and he grew up clever
and sly.

Through it all, Jax thought about the moon. When he began to think he
couldn't go another step, he'd put on his spectacles and look up at her,
round-bellied in the sky. And when he saw her he would feel a slow
stirring in his chest. And in time he came to think he was in love.

Eventually the road Jax followed passed through Tinuë, as all roads do.
Still he walked, following the Great Stone Road east toward the
mountains.

The road climbed and climbed. He ate the last of his bread and the last
of his cheese. He drank the last of his water and the last of his wine.
He walked for days without either, the moon growing larger in the night
sky above him.

Just as his strength was failing, Jax climbed over a rise and found an
old man sitting in the mouth of a cave. He had a long grey beard and a
long grey robe. He had no hair on the top of his head, or shoes on the
bottom of his feet. His eyes were open and his mouth was closed.

His face lit up when he saw Jax. He came to his feet and smiled. "Hello,
hello," he said, his voice bright and rich. "You're a long way from
anywhere. How is the road to Tinuë?"

"It's long," Jax said. "And hard and weary."

The old man invited Jax to sit. He brought him water and goat's milk and
fruit to eat. Jax ate hungrily, then offered the man a pair of shoes
from his pack in trade.

"No need, no need," the old man said happily, wiggling his toes. "But
thanks for offering all the same."

Jax shrugged. "As you will. But what are you doing here, so far from
everything?"

"I found this cave when I was out chasing the wind," the old man said.
"I decided to stay because this place is perfect for what I do."

"And what is that?" Jax asked.

"I am a listener," the old man said. "I listen to things to see what
they have to say."

"Ah," Jax said carefully. "And this is a good place for that?"

"Quite good. Quite excellent good," the old man said. "You need to get a
long ways away from people before you can learn to listen properly." He
smiled. "What brings you out to my little corner of the sky?"

"I am trying to find the moon."

"That's easy enough," the old man said, gesturing to the sky. "We see
her most every night, weather permitting."

"No. I'm trying to catch her. If I could be with her, I think I could be
happy."

The old man looked at him seriously. "You want to catch her, do you? How
long have you been chasing?"

"More years and miles than I can count."

The old man closed his eyes for a moment, then nodded to himself. "I can
hear it in your voice. This is no passing fancy." He leaned close and
pressed his ear to Jax's chest. He closed his eyes for another long
moment and was very still. "Oh," he said softly. "How sad. Your heart is
broken and you've never even had a chance to use it."

Jax moved around, a little uncomfortable. "If you don't mind my asking,"
Jax said, "what's your name?"

[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_592 .pagebreak title="592"}"I don't mind you
asking," the old man said. "So long as you don't mind me not telling. If
you had my name, I'd be under your power, wouldn't I?"

"Would you?" Jax asked.

"Of course." The old man frowned. "That is the way of things. Though you
don't seem to be much for listening, it's best to be careful. If you
managed to catch hold of even just a piece of my name, you'd have all
manner of power over me."

Jax wondered if this man might be able to help him. While he didn't seem
to be terribly ordinary, Jax knew he was on no ordinary errand. If he'd
been trying to catch a cow, he would ask a farmer's help. But to catch
the moon, perhaps he needed the help of an odd old man. "You said you
used to chase the wind," Jax said. "Did you ever catch it?"

"In some ways, yes," the old man said. "And in other ways, no. There are
many ways of looking at that question, you see."

"Could you help me catch the moon?"

"I might be able to give you some advice," the old man said reluctantly.
"But first you should think this over, boy. When you love something, you
have to make sure it loves you back, or you'll bring about no end of
trouble chasing it."

*Hespe didn't look at Dedan as she said this. She looked everywhere in
the world but at him. Because of this, she didn't see the stricken,
helpless look on his face.*

"How can I find out if she loves me?" Jax asked.

"You could try listening," the old man said, almost shyly. "It works
wonders, you know. I could teach you how."

"How long would that take?"

"A couple years," the old man said. "Give or take. It depends on if you
have a knack for it. It's tricky, proper listening. But once you have
it, you'll know the moon down to the bottoms of her feet."

Jax shook his head. "Too long. If I can catch her, I can talk with her.
I can make---"

"Well that's part of your problem right there," the old man said. "You
don't really want to catch her. Not really. Will you trail her through
the sky? Of course not. You want to *meet* her. That means you need the
moon to come to you."

"How can I do that?" he said.

The old man smiled. "Well that's the question, isn't it? What do you
have that the moon might want? What do you have to offer the moon?"

"Only what I have in these packs."

"That's not quite what I meant," the old man muttered. "But we might as
well take a look at what you've brought, too."

[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_593 .pagebreak title="593"}The old hermit
looked through the first pack and found many practical things. The
contents of the second pack were more expensive and rare, but no more
useful.

Then the old man saw the third pack. "And what do you have in there?"

"I've never been able to get it open," Jax said. "The knot is too much
for me."

The hermit closed his eyes for a moment, listening. Then he opened his
eyes and frowned at Jax. "The knot says you tore at it. Pricked it with
a knife. Bit it with your teeth."

Jax was surprised. "I did," he admitted. "I told you, I tried everything
to get it open."

"Hardly everything," the hermit said scornfully. He lifted the pack
until the knotted cord was in front of his face. "I'm terribly sorry,"
he said. "But would you open up?" He paused. "Yes. I apologize. He won't
do it again."

The knot unraveled and the hermit opened the pack. As he looked inside,
his eyes widened and he let out a low whistle.

But when the old man spread the pack open on the ground, Jax's shoulders
slumped. He had been hoping for money, or gems, some treasure he could
give the moon as a gift. But all the pack held was a bent piece of wood,
a stone flute, and a small iron box.

Of these, only the flute caught Jax's attention. It was made of a pale
green stone. "I had a flute when I was younger," Jax said. "But it broke
and I could never make it right again."

"They're all quite impressive," the hermit said.

"The flute is nice enough," Jax said with a shrug. "But what use is a
piece of wood and a box too small for anything practical?"

The hermit shook his head. "Can't you hear them? Most things whisper.
These things shout." He pointed at the piece of crooked wood. "That is a
folding house unless I miss my guess. Quite a nice one too."

"What's a folding house?"

"You know how you can fold a piece of paper on itself, and each time it
gets smaller? A folding house is like that. Except it's a house, of
course."

Jax took hold of the piece of crooked wood and tried to straighten it.
Suddenly he was holding two pieces of wood that resembled the beginning
of a doorframe.

"Don't unfold it here!" the old man shouted. "I don't want a house
outside my cave, blocking my sunlight!"

Jax tried to push the two pieces of wood, back together. "Why can't I
fold it back up?"

"Because you don't know how, I expect," the old man said plainly. "I
[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_594 .pagebreak title="594"}suggest you wait
until you know where you want it before you unfold it the rest of the
way."

Jax set the wood down carefully, then picked up the flute. "Is this
special too?" He put it to his lips and blew a simple trill like a
Will's Widow.

*Hespe smiled teasingly, lifted a familiar wooden whistle to her lips,
and blew:* Ta-ta DEE. Ta-ta DEE.

Now everyone knows the Will's Widow is also called a nightjar. So it
isn't out when the sun is shining. Despite this, a dozen nightjars flew
down and landed all around Jax, looking at him curiously and blinking in
the bright sunlight.

"It seems to be more than the usual flute," the old man said.

"And the box?" Jax reached out and picked it up. It was dark, and cold,
and small enough that he could close his hand around it.

The old man shivered and looked away from the box. "It's empty."

"How can you tell without seeing inside?"

"By listening," he said. "I'm amazed you can't hear it yourself. It's
the emptiest thing I've ever heard. It echoes. It's meant for keeping
things inside."

"All boxes are meant for keeping things inside."

"And all flutes are meant to play beguiling music," the old man pointed
out. "But this flute is moreso. The same is true with this box."

Jax looked at the box for a moment, then set it down carefully and began
to tie up the third pack with the three treasures inside it. "I think
I'll be moving on," Jax said.

"Are you sure you won't consider staying for a month or two?" the old
man said. "You could learn to listen just a bit more closely. Useful
thing, listening."

"You've given me some things to think about," Jax said. "And I think
you're right, I shouldn't be chasing the moon. I should make the moon
come to me."

"That's not what I actually said," the old man murmured. But he did so
in a resigned way. Skilled listener that he was, he knew he wasn't being
heard.

Jax set off the next morning, following the moon higher into the
mountains. Eventually he found a large, flat piece of ground nestled
high among the tallest peaks.

Jax brought out the crooked piece of wood and, piece by piece, began to
unfold the house. With the whole night in front of him, he was hoping to
have it finished well before the moon began to rise.

But the house was much larger than he had guessed, more a mansion than a
simple cottage. What's more, unfolding it was more complicated than he
had expected. By the time the moon reached the top of the sky, he was
still far from being finished.

[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_595 .pagebreak title="595"}Perhaps Jax hurried
because of this. Perhaps he was reckless. Or perhaps it was just that
Jax was unlucky as ever.

In the end the result was the same: the mansion was magnificent, huge
and sprawling. But it didn't fit together properly. There were stairways
that led sideways instead of up. Some rooms had too few walls, or too
many. Many rooms had no ceiling, and high above they showed a strange
sky full of unfamiliar stars.

Everything about the place was slightly skewed. In one room you could
look out the window at the springtime flowers, while across the hall the
windows were filmed with winter's frost. It could be time for breakfast
in the ballroom, while twilight filled a nearby bedroom.

Because nothing in the house was true, none of the doors or windows fit
tight. They could be closed, even locked, but never made fast. And as
big as it was, the mansion had a great many doors and windows, so there
were a great many ways both in and out.

Jax paid no mind to any of this. Instead, he raced to the top of the
highest tower and put the flute to his lips.

He poured out a sweet song into the clear night sky. No simple bird
trill, this was a song that came from his broken heart. It was strong
and sad. It fluttered like a bird with a broken wing.

Hearing it, the moon came down to the tower. Pale and round and
beautiful, she stood before Jax in all her glory, and for the first time
in his life he felt a single breath of joy.

They spoke then, on the top of the tower, Jax telling her of his life,
his wager, and his long, lonely journey. The moon listened, and laughed,
and smiled.

But eventually she looked longingly toward the sky.

Jax knew what this foretold. "Stay with me," he pleaded. "I can only be
happy if you're mine."

"I must go," she said. "The sky is my home."

"I have made a home for you," Jax said, gesturing to the vast mansion
below them. "There is sky enough for you here. An empty sky that is all
for you."

"I must go," she said. "I have been away too long."

He raised his hand as if to grab her, then stopped himself. "Time is
what we make it here," he said. "Your bedroom can be winter or spring,
all according to your desire."

"I must go," she said, looking upward. "But I will return. I am always
and unchanging. And if you play your flute for me, I will visit you
again."

"I have given you three things," he said. "A song, a home, and my heart.
If you must go, will you not give me three things in return?"

[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_596 .pagebreak title="596"}She laughed,
holding her hands out to her sides. She was naked as the moon. "What do
I have that I can leave with you? But if it is mine to give, ask and I
will give it."

Jax found his mouth was dry. "First, I would ask for a touch of your
hand."

"One hand clasps another, and I grant you your request." She reached out
to him, her hand smooth and strong. At first it seemed cool, then
marvelously warm. Gooseflesh ran all up and down Jax's arms.

"Second, I would beg a kiss," he said.

"One mouth tastes another, and I grant you your request." She leaned in
close to him. Her breath was sweet, her lips firm as fruit. The kiss
pulled the breath out of Jax, and for the first time in his life, his
mouth curved into the beginning of a smile.

"And what is the third thing?" the moon asked. Her eyes were dark and
wise, her smile was full and knowing.

"Your name," Jax breathed. "That I might call you by it."

"One body ..." the moon began, stepping forward eagerly. Then she
paused. "Only my name?" she asked, sliding her hand around his waist.

Jax nodded.

She leaned close and spoke warmly against his ear, *"Ludis*."

And Jax brought out the black iron box, closing the lid and catching her
name inside.

"Now I have your name," he said firmly. "So I have mastery over you. And
I say you must stay with me forever, so I can be happy."

And so it was. The box was no longer cold in his hand. It was warm, and
inside he could feel her name, fluttering like a moth against a
windowpane.

Perhaps Jax had been too slow in closing the box. Perhaps he fumbled
with the clasp. Or perhaps he was simply unlucky in all things. But in
the end he only managed to catch a piece of the moon's name, not the
thing entire.

So Jax could keep her for a while, but she always slips away from him.
Out from his broken mansion, back to our world. But still, he has a
piece of her name, and so she always must return.

![](images/line.png){#img122}

Hespe looked around at us, smiling. "And that is why the moon is always
changing. And that is where Jax keeps her when she is not in our sky. He
caught her and he keeps her still. But whether or not he is happy is
only for him to know."

There was a long moment of silence.

"That," Dedan said, "is one hell of a story."

Hespe looked down, and though the firelight made it difficult to tell, I
[]{#chapter088.xhtml_page_597 .pagebreak title="597"}would have bet a
penny she was blushing. Hard Hespe, who I wouldn't have guessed had a
drop of blushing in her. "It took me a long time to remember all of it,"
she said, "My mother used to tell it to me when I was a little girl.
Every night, always the same. Said she learned it from her mother."

"Well, you'll need to make sure you tell your daughters, too," Dedan
said. "A story like that is too good to let fall by the roadside."

Hespe smiled.
