There was a pause in the conversation, then Shehyn gestured *solemn
importance*. "When we spoke before, you asked me of the Rhinta. Do you
remember?" Shehyn asked. From the corner of my eye I saw Vashet shift
uncomfortably in her seat.

Suddenly excited, I nodded.

"I have remembered a story of such. Would you like to hear it?"

I gestured *extreme eager interest*.

"It is an old story, old as Ademre. It is always told the same. Are you
ready to hear it?" *Profound formality*. There was a hint of ritual in
her voice.

I nodded again. *Pleading entreaty*.

"As with all things, there are rules. I will tell this story once.
After, you may not speak of it. After, you may not ask questions."
Shehyn looked back and forth between Vashet and myself. *Grave
seriousness*. "Not until you have slept one thousand nights may you
speak on this. Not until you have traveled one thousand miles may you
ask questions. Knowing this, are you willing to hear it?"

I nodded a third time, my excitement rising in me.

Shehyn spoke with great formality. "Once there was a great realm peopled
by great people. They were not Ademre. They were what Ademre was before we became
ourselves.

"But at this time they were themselves, the women and men fair and
strong. They sang songs of power and fought as well as Ademre do.

"These people had a great empire. The name of the empire is forgotten.
It is not important as the empire has fallen, and since that time the
land has broken and the sky changed.
[note: land has broken?  as in, split off?  sky changed makes sense due to the moon...but could it be more than just the moon?]

"In the empire there were seven cities and one city. The names of the
seven cities are forgotten, for they are fallen to treachery and
destroyed by time. The one city was destroyed as well, but its name
remains. It was called Tariniel.

"The empire had an enemy, as strength must have. But the enemy was not
great enough to pull it down. Not by pulling or pushing was the enemy
strong enough to drag it down. The enemy's name is remembered, but it
will wait.

"Since not by strength could the enemy win, he moved like a worm in
fruit. The enemy was not of the Lethani. He poisoned seven others
against the empire, and they forgot the Lethani. Six of them betrayed
the cities that trusted them. Six cities fell and their names are
forgotten.

"One remembered the Lethani, and did not betray a city. That city did
not fall. One of them remembered the Lethani and the empire was left
with hope. With one unfallen city. But even the name of that city is
forgotten, buried in time.

"But seven names are remembered. The name of the one and of the six who
follow him. Seven names have been carried through the crumbling of
empire, through the broken land and changing sky. Seven names are
remembered through the long wandering of Ademre. Seven names have been
remembered, the names of the seven traitors. Remember them and know them
by their seven signs:

*Cyphus bears the blue flame.*

*Stercus is in thrall of iron.*

*Ferule chill and dark of eye.*

*Usnea lives in nothing but decay.*

*Grey Dalcenti never speaks.*

*Pale Alenta brings the blight.*

*Last there is the lord of seven:*

*Hated. Hopeless. Sleepless. Sane.*

*Alaxel bears the shadow's hame."*
