Silence.

"Okay." I cleared my throat. "There is a place not many folk have seen.
A strange place called Faeriniel. If you believe the stories, there are
two things that make Faeriniel unique. First, it is where all the roads
in the world meet. Second, it is not a place any man has ever found by
searching. It is not a place you travel to, it is the place you pass
through while on your way to somewhere else.

"They say that anyone who travels long enough will come there. This is a
story of that place, and of an old man on a long road, and of a long and
lonely night without a moon...."

# *A Piece of Fire*

[F]AERINIEL WAS A GREAT crossroads, but there was no inn
where the roads met. Instead there were clearings in the trees where
travelers would set their camps and pass the night.

Once, years ago and miles away, five groups of travelers came to
Faeriniel. They chose their clearings and lit their fires as the sun
began to set, pausing on their way from here to there.

Later, after the sun had set and night was settled firmly in the sky, an
old beggar in a tattered robe came walking down the road. He moved with
slow care, leaning on a walking stick.

The old man was going from nowhere to nowhere. He had no hat for his
head and no pack for his back. He had not a penny or a purse to put it
in. He barely even owned his own name, and even that had been worn thin
and threadbare through the years.

If you'd asked him who he was, he would have said, "Nobody." But he
would have been wrong.

The old man made his way into Faeriniel. He was hungry as a dry fire and
weary to his bones. All that kept him moving was the hope that someone
might give him a bit of dinner and a piece of their fire.

So when the old man saw firelight flickering, he left the road and made
his weary way toward it. Soon he saw four tall horses through the trees.
Silver was worked into their harness and silver was mixed with the iron
of their shoes. Nearby the beggar saw a dozen mules laden with goods:
woolen cloth, cunning jewelry, and fine steel blades.

But what caught the beggar's attention was the side of meat above the
fire, steaming and dripping fat onto the coals. He almost fainted at the
sweet smell of it,
for he had been walking all day with nothing to eat but a handful of
acorns and a bruised apple he'd found by the side of the road.

Stepping into the clearing, the old beggar called out to the three
dark-bearded men who sat around the fire. "Halloo," he said. "Can you
spare a bit of meat and a piece of your fire?"

They turned, their gold chains glittering in the firelight. "Certainly,"
their leader said. "What do you have with you? Bits or pennies? Rings or
strehlaum? Or do you have the true-ringing Cealdish coin we prize above
all others?"

"I have none of these," the old beggar said, opening his hands to show
they were empty.

"Then you will find no comfort here," they said, and as he watched they
began to carve thick pieces from the haunch that hung by the fire.

*"No offense, Wilem.* *It's just how the story goes."*

*"I didn't say anything."*

*"You looked like you were going to."*

*"I may.* *But it will wait until after."*

The old man walked on, following the light of another fire through the
trees.

"Halloo!" the old beggar called out as he stepped into the second
clearing. He tried to sound cheerful, though he was weary and sore. "Can
you spare a bit of meat and a piece of your fire?"

There were four travelers there, two men and two women. At the sound of
his voice they rose to their feet, but none of them spoke. The old man
waited politely, trying to appear pleasant and harmless. But the quiet
stretched on, long as long, and still no word was spoken.

Understandably, the old man grew irritated. He was used to being shunned
or shrugged aside, but these folk merely stood. They were quiet and
restless, moving from foot to foot while their hands twitched nervously.

Just as he was about to sulk away, the fire flared and the beggar saw
the four wore the blood-red clothes that marked them as Adem
mercenaries. Then the old man understood. The Adem are called the silent
folk, and they speak only rarely.

The old man knew many stories of the Adem. He'd heard that they
possessed a secret craft called the Lethani. This let them wear their
quiet like an armor that would turn a blade or stop an arrow in the air.
This is why they seldom spoke. They saved their words, keeping them
inside like coals in the belly of a furnace.

Those hoarded words filled them with so much restless energy that they
could never be completely still, which is why they were always twitching and fidgeting
about. Then when they fought, they used their secret craft to burn those
words like fuel inside themselves. This made them strong as bears and
fast as snakes.

When the beggar first heard these rumors, he thought them silly campfire
stories. But years ago in Modeg, he had seen an Adem woman fight the
city guard. The soldiers were armed and armored, thick of arm and chest.
They had demanded to see the woman's sword in the king's name, and
though hesitant, she presented it to them. As soon as they held it in
their hands, they had leered and pawed at her, making lewd suggestions
about what she could do to get it back.

They were tall men with bright armor and their swords were sharp. They
fell like autumn wheat before her. She killed three of them, breaking
their bones with her hands.

Her own wounds were minor by comparison, a dark bruise along one cheek,
a slight limp, a shallow cut across one hand. Even after all the long
years, the old man remembered the way she had licked the blood from the
back of her hand like a cat.

This is what the old beggar thought of when he saw the Adem standing
there. All thought of food and fire left him, and he backed slowly into
the shelter of the surrounding trees.

Then he set off toward the next fire, hoping the third time would prove
lucky.

At this clearing were a number of Aturans standing around a dead donkey
lying near a cart. One of them spotted the old man. "Look!" he pointed.
"Grab him! We'll hitch him to the cart and make him pull!"

The old man darted back into the trees, and after running to and fro, he
lost the Aturans by hiding under a pile of moldering leaves.

When the sound of the Aturans faded, the old man dragged himself from
the leaves and found his walking stick. Then, with the courage of one
who is poor and hungry, he set off to the fourth fire he saw in the
distance.

There he might have found what he was looking for, because around the
fire were traders from Vintas. Had things been different they might have
welcomed him to dinner, saying, "Where six can eat, seven can eat."

But by this point the old man was quite a sight. His hair stuck from his
head in wild disarray. His robe, ragged before, was now torn and dirty.
His face was pale from fright, and his breathing groaned and wheezed in
his chest.

Because of this, the Vints gasped and made gestures before their faces.
They thought he was a barrow draug, you see, one of the unquiet dead
that superstitious Vints believe walk the night.

Each of the Vints
had a different thought as to how they could stop him. Some thought fire
would frighten him off, some thought salt scattered on the grass would
keep him away, some thought iron would cut the strings that held the
soul to his dead body.

Listening to them argue, the old beggar realized that no matter what
they agreed on, he would not be the better for it. So he hurried back to
the sheltering trees.

The old man found a rock to sit on and brushed the dead leaves and dirt
away as best he could. After sitting for a while he thought to try one
final campsite, knowing it would only take one generous traveler to fill
his belly.

He was pleased to see a lone man sitting at the final fire. Coming
closer, he saw a thing that left him both delighted and afraid, for
though the beggar had lived many years, he had never before spoken to
one of the Amyr.

Still, he knew the Amyr were a part of Tehlu's church, and---

*"They weren't part of the church," Wilem said.*

*"What? Of course they were."*

*"No, they were of the Aturan bureaucracy. They had ...*
Vecarum*---judiciary powers."*

*"They were called the Holy Order of Amyr. They were the strong right
hand of the church."*

*"Bet a jot?"*

*"Fine.* *If it will keep you quiet through the rest of the story."*

The old beggar was delighted, for he knew the Amyr were a part of
Tehlu's church, and the church was sometimes generous to the poor.

The Amyr came to his feet as the old man approached. "Who goes there?"
he asked. His voice was proud and powerful, but also tired. "Know I am
of the Order Amyr. None should come between me and my tasks. I will act
for the good of all, though Gods and men might bar my way."

"Sir," the beggar said, "I'm just hoping for a piece of fire and some
charity on a long road."

The Amyr gestured the old man forward. He was armored in a suit of
bright steel rings, and his sword was tall as a man. His tabard was of
shining white, but from the elbows the color darkened into crimson, as
if dipped in blood. In the center of his chest, he wore the symbol of
the Amyr: the black tower wrapped in a crimson flame.

The old man sat near the fire and gave a sigh as the heat soaked into
his bones.

After a moment, the Amyr spoke. "I'm afraid I can offer you nothing to
eat. My horse eats better than I do tonight, but that does not mean that
he eats well."

"Anything would be
a lovely help," the old man said. "Scraps are more than what I have. I
am not proud."

The Amyr sighed. "Tomorrow I must ride fifty miles to stop a trial. If I
fail or falter, an innocent woman will die. This is all I have." The
Amyr gestured to a piece of cloth with a crust of bread and a sliver of
cheese. Both of them together would hardly be enough to dent the old
man's hunger. It made a poor dinner for a man as large as the Amyr.

"Tomorrow I must ride and fight," the armored man said. "I need my
strength. So I must weigh your night of hunger against this woman's
life." As he spoke, the Amyr raised his hands and held them palms up,
like the plates of a balancing scale.

When he made this motion, the old beggar saw the backs of the Amyr's
hands, and for a second he thought the Amyr had cut himself, and that
blood was running between his fingers and down his arms. Then the fire
shifted and the beggar saw it was only a tattoo, though he still
shivered at the bloody markings on the Amyr's hands and arms.

He would have done more than shiver had he known all that those markings
meant. They showed the Amyr was trusted so completely by the Order that
his actions would never be questioned. And as the Order stood behind
him, no church, no court, no king could move against him. For he was one
of the Ciridae, highest of the Amyr.

If he killed an unarmed man, it was not murder in the Order's eyes. If
he strangled a pregnant woman in the middle of the street, none would
speak against him. Should he burn a church or break an old stone bridge,
the empire held him blameless, trusting all he did was in the service of
the greater good.

But the beggar knew none of this, and so he tried again. "If you don't
have any food to spare, could I have a penny or two?" He thought of the
Cealdish camp, and how he might buy a slice of meat or bread.

The Amyr shook his head. "If I did, I would gladly give it. But three
days ago I gave the last of my money to a new widower with a hungry
child. I have been penniless as you are ever since." He shook his head,
his expression weary and full of regret. "I wish circumstances were
different. But I now must sleep, so you must go."

The old man was hardly happy about this, but there was something in the
Amyr's voice that made him wary. So he creaked back onto his feet and
left the fire behind.

Before the warmth of the Amyr's fire could leave him, the old man
tightened his belt and made up his mind to simply walk through till
morning. Hoping the end of his road might bring him better luck, or at
least a meeting with some kinder folk.

So he walked
through the center of Faeriniel, and as he did, he saw a circle of great
grey stones. Inside that circle was the faint glow of firelight hidden
in a well-dug pit. The old man noticed he couldn't smell a wisp of smoke
either, and realized these folk were burning rennel wood, which burns
hot and hard, but doesn't smoke or stink.

Then the old man saw that two of the great shapes were not stones at
all. They were wagons. A handful of people huddled round a cookpot in
the dim light of the fire.

But the old man didn't have a shred of hope left, so he kept walking. He
was almost past the stones when a voice called out: "Ho, there! Who are
you, and why do you pass by so quietly at night?"

"I'm nobody," the old man said. "Just an old beggar, following my road
until its end."

"Why are you out walking instead of settling down to sleep? These roads
are not all safe at night," the voice replied.

"I have no bed," the old man said. "And tonight I cannot beg or borrow
one for all the world."

"There is one here for you, if you would like it. And a bit of dinner if
you've a mind to share. No one should walk all day and night besides." A
handsome, bearded man stepped from the concealment of the tall grey
stones. He took the old man's elbow and led him toward the fire, calling
ahead, "We have a guest tonight!"

There was a small stir of motion ahead of them, but the night was
moonless and their fire was deep in a concealing pit, so the beggar
couldn't see much of what was being done. Curious, he asked, "Why do you
hide your fire?"

His host sighed. "Not all folk are filled with love for us. We're safest
by being out of harm's way. Besides, our fire is small tonight."

"Why is that?" the beggar asked. "With so many trees, wood should be
easy to come by."

"We went gathering earlier," the bearded man explained. "But folk called
us thieves and shot arrows at us." He shrugged. "So we make do, and
tomorrow will take care of itself." He shook his head. "But I am talking
too much. May I offer you a drink, father?"

"A bit of water, if you can spare it."

"Nonsense, you will have wine."

It had been a long time since the beggar had tasted wine, and the
thought of it was enough to set his mouth all a-watering. But he knew
wine was not the best thing for an empty stomach that had walked all
day, so he said, "You are kind, bless you. But water is good enough for
me."

The man at his elbow smiled. "Then have water and wine, each to your desire." And
saying so he brought the beggar to their water barrel.

The old beggar bent and drew up a ladle of water. When it touched his
lips it was cool and sweet, but as he drew up the ladle, he couldn't
help but notice the barrel was very nearly empty.

In spite of this, his host urged him, "Take another and wash the dust
from your hands and face. I can tell you've been on the road for a long
and weary while." So the old beggar took a second dipper of water, and
once his hands and face were clean, he felt much refreshed.

Then his host took his elbow again and led him to the fire. "What is
your name, father?"

Again the beggar was surprised. It had been years since anyone had cared
enough to ask his name. It had been so long he had to stop and think
about it for a moment. "Sceop," he said at last. "I am called Sceop, and
you?"

"My name is Terris," his host said as he made the old man comfortable
close to the fire. "This is Silla, my wife, and Wint, our son. This is
Shari and Benthum and Lil and Peter and Fent."

Then Terris brought Sceop wine. Silla gave him a heavy ladle of potato
soup, a slice of warm bread, and half a golden summer squash with sweet
butter in the bowl of it. It was plain, and there was not a lot, but to
Sceop it seemed a feast. And as he ate, Wint kept his cup full of wine,
and smiled at him, and sat by his knee and called him grandfather.

The last was too much for the old beggar, and he began to cry softly.
Perhaps it was that he was old, and his day had been a long one. Perhaps
it was that he was not used to kindness. Perhaps it was the wine.
Whatever the reason, tears began to trickle down his face and lose
themselves in his deep white beard.

Terris saw this and was quick to ask, "Father, whatever is the matter?"

"I am a silly old man," Sceop said, more to himself than to the rest of
them. "You have been kinder to me than anyone in years, and I am sorry I
cannot repay you."

Terris smiled and laid a hand on the old man's back. "Would you really
like to pay?"

"I cannot. I have nothing to give you."

Terris's smile widened. "Sceop. We are the Edema Ruh. The thing we value
most is something everyone possesses." One by one, Sceop saw the faces
around the fire look up at him expectantly. Terris said, "You could tell
us your story."

Not knowing what else to do, Sceop began to speak. He told how he had
come to Faeriniel. How he had walked from one fire to the next, hoping
for charity. At first his voice faltered and his story stumbled, for he had been alone a
long time and was not used to talking. But soon his voice became
stronger, his words bolder, and as the fire flickered and reflected in
his bright blue eyes, his hands danced along with his old dried voice.
Even the Edema Ruh, who know all the stories in the world, could do
nothing but listen in wonder.

When his story came to an end the troupers stirred as if waking from a
deep sleep. For a moment they did nothing but look at each other; then
they looked at Sceop.

Terris knew what they were thinking. "Sceop," he asked gently. "Where
were you headed, when I stopped you tonight?"

"I was going to Tinuë," said Sceop, who was a little embarrassed at how
caught up in the story he had become. His face was hot and red, and he
felt foolish.

"We are bound for Belenay ourselves," Terris said. "Would you consider
coming with us instead?"

For a moment Sceop's face lit with hope, but then it fell. "I would be
nothing but a burden. Even a beggar has his pride."

Terris laughed. "You would tell the Edema about pride? We do not ask you
out of pity. We ask because you belong in our family, and we would have
you tell us a dozen dozen stories in the years to come."

The beggar shook his head. "My blood is not yours. I am not a part of
your family."

"What does that have to do with the price of butter?" Terris asked. "We
Ruh decide who is a part of our family and who is not. You belong with
us. Look around and see if I am lying."

Sceop looked up at the circle of faces and saw what Terris said was
true.

And so the old man stayed, and lived with them for many years before
they parted ways. Many things he saw, and many stories he told, and
everyone was wiser in the end because of it.

This thing happened, though it was years and miles away, I have heard it
from the mouths of the Edema Ruh, and thus I know it to be true.

