i'm convinced that kelsier is considered a "psychopath" solely because brandon referred to him as such as such in [two](https://wob.coppermind.net/events/190/#e4103) [wobs](https://wob.coppermind.net/events/256/#e8700) -- but if that was his intent from the beginning then he absolutely failed to represent that aspect of his character in any of the novels.  he comes off as more cutthroat and nefarious in the stormlight series, but even there it's primarily due to his lackeys and nothing directly attributable to him.  even in The Lost Metal (the last Mistborn novel to be released), kelsier still comes off as a morally conflicted character *trying* to do well and help others; in TLM he is explicitly worried about protecting the lives of those on scadrial *still*.  in the first Mistborn novel he shows a lot of clear empathy to both his crew and the skaa -- going so far as to give up his own life (or, at least, that was the plan) to help save the skaa from slavery and protect them against an oppressive ruler.  after vin goes with him to meet the skaa, she has this to say about him:
> *He really does seem to care for them,* Vin thought, watching Kelsier pick up a small child. *I don't think it's just a show. This is how he is---he loves people, loves the skaa. But . . . it's more like the love of a parent for a child than it is like the love of a man for his equals.*

say what you want about the man, but that is not "psychopathic."  sure, his care for them isn't as raw and egalitarian as elend's is, but the love of a parent for a child *is still love* -- *empathetic* love that's rarely equaled.

i've [ranted about this before](https://www.reddit.com/r/Cosmere/comments/1mfvh2q/comment/n6ygevo/), but if it was truly brandon's intent in the original mistborn trilogy to portray him as a psychopath then brandon failed hard.  my guess is that sometime around writing the Hero of Ages (with it's awkward >!"hoid makes vin uncomfortable because kelsier says so"!< scene) brandon decided to setup kelsier as a foil character to hoid, guiding the overarching cosmere-wide narrative towards a kelsier vs hoid showdown.  i suspect he felt a large conflict between two almost universally loved characters may not please a lot of fans (or maybe just not be the story he wanted to tell), so he started to retcon kelsier as more evil than portrayed by calling him a "psychopath."  his initial wob came down fairly hard on the "kelsier is a psychopath" characterization, but when asked about it a few years later it sounded like he'd softened on the rhetoric a bit by instead saying he had "some psychopathic tendencies."

either way, it really bugs me we're given a morally complex and emotionally conflicted character in the novels just to have brandon hand wave him as a psycho outside the narrative.  like, if you really want him to be a psycho, at least give us that intent *in world* so we don't end up with completely different opinions of kelsier based on whether a given fan had read/heard the "kelsier bad" wobs or not.  i feel like very few people would consider kelsier a psycho based solely on in-world narrative.  you can kinda twist some of it to give you that impression if you'd otherwise heard that characterization of him from the wobs or reddit posts, but without that external characterization to color the novels it just doesn't read like that to me or anyone else i've discussed this with IRL -- particularly when you compare his words and actions to those of some real-world historical figures we largely regard as heroes today.

**to me, at least, brandon's attempt to paint him as a psychopath *outside* the novels gives strong "daenerys targaryen in season 8 of Game of Thrones" vibes.**  the novels and narrative should *speak for themselves* -- don't give us a well-liked, morally gray main character that we *understand* and *empathize* with and drop an "oh btw they're an evil psychopath" plot twist on us overnight.

(personally, i'd be very satisfied watching a kelsier vs hoid conflict just as they're written on the pages -- two morally complex individuals both doing the best they can to fix the broken pieces of the world as they see it.  i know it'd upset a lot of people, but that's a very real and raw conflict to have.  hrathen's likability and moral complexity are the two biggest reasons i think he's one of the best "villians" that cosmere has had; bad guys don't have to be "bad.")
