coming at this a little late, as it is now early winter 2025 and i finished reading row summer of 2024.  this was the first book i added to my goodreads profile and i've had great forgetting goodreads even exists since.  tbh it's a little funny to think about row now, as this was only the 4th cosmere novel i'd read after discovering stormlight/twok back in may and i've since gone on to complete the entirety of the cosmere -- including wat.  i fear my review of this book will be heavily tainted by the metallic taste of bitter lingering retrospection (and theories of hoid).

row was fantastic -- definitely not the best stormlight book, but even a completely average stormlight book becomes a can't-put-it-down adventure.  back when i was first reading this, i wasn't sando'ologically experienced enough to catch brandon's extremely heavy hand of foreshadowing, nor was i cosmereologically aware enough to truly understand the implications of many of the major themes & events.  i honestly can't say i truly understand the implications even now, but as i made my way through the rest of the cosmere i quickly started to place the pieces together.  searching through those impossibly interlocking pieces, i realized (all too late) i'd fallen into an endless chasm of conspiratorial madness i've yet to find my out of -- particularly as i marched through the mistborn (quasi-pseudo-)trilogies.

to keep my reading log here (relatively) tame, if you really want to experience the depth of my madness you'll have to head to reddit (or [github](https://github.com/shaneish/cosmere-ish/blob/master/cosmere.md) -- where you'll find everything from linguistic analyses of "adonalsium" to essays on the triune structure of shardic (lowercase-) godhood and their transubstantial physical manifestations.  what i will say here, though, is witnessing saze's transfiguration into harmony really changed my entire perspective on row.  you immediately understand the implications of having an entire book named after combining the metaphysical spectrographs of honor and odium -- their future synthesis, their synthesized type signature, and the cosmere-wide consequences of a god who dances to the rhythm of war.

an unfortunately fortunate consequence of the tungstenically dense interconnection within the cosmere mythology brando has dumped on our laps means i will need to re-read the first four stormlight books with a more critical eye now.  i do not regret starting my cosmere journey with the stormlight series and would happily do it again, but i just won't be able to banish the madness without another highlighter- & notebook-plagued romp through roshar.

rust & ruins, my poor stormin' soul '˙◠˙.

---
coming at this a little late, as it is now early winter 2025 and i finished reading <i>r</i>o<i>w</i> summer of 2024.  this was the first book i added to my goodreads profile and i've had great forgetting goodreads even exists since.  tbh it's a little funny to think about <i>r</i>o<i>w</i> now, as this was only the 4th cosmere novel i'd read after discovering <i>stormlight</i>/<i>tw</i>o<i>k</i> back in may and i've gone on to complete the entirety of the cosmere -- including <i>w</i>a<i>t</i>.  i fear my review of this book will be heavily tainted by the bitter metallic taste of lingering retrospection (and dreams of hoid).

<i>r</i>o<i>w</i> was fantastic -- definitely not the best <i>stormlight</i> book, but even a completely average <i>stormlight</i> book becomes a can't-put-it-down adventure.  back when i was first reading this, i wasn't sando'ologically experienced enough to catch brandon's extremely heavy hand of foreshadowing, nor was i cosmereologically aware enough to truly understand the implications of many of the major themes & events.  i honestly can't say i truly understand the implications even now, but as i made my way through the rest of the cosmere i quickly started to place the pieces together.  searching through those impossibly interlocking pieces, i realized (all too late) i'd fallen into an endless chasm of conspiratorial madness i've yet to find my out of -- particularly as i marched through the <i>mistborn</i> (quasi-pseudo-)trilogies.

to keep my reading log here (relatively) tame, if you really want to experience the depth of my madness you'll have to head to reddit (or <a href="https://github.com/shaneish/cosmere-ish/blob/master/cosmere.md">github</a> for a small taste) -- where you'll find everything from linguistic analyses of "adonalsium" to essays on the triune structure of shardic (lowercase-) godhood and their transubstantial physical manifestations.  what i will say here, though, is witnessing saze's transfiguration into <i>h</i>armony really changed my entire perspective on <i>r</i>o<i>w</i>.  you immediately understand the implications of having an entire book named after combining the metaphysical spectrographs of <i>h</i>onor and <i>o</i>dium -- their future synthesis, their new type signature, and the cosmere-wide consequences of a god who dances to the <i>r</i>hythm of <i>w</i>ar.

an unfortunately fortunate consequence of the cosmere's dense mythological interconnection brando has graciously dumped on our laps means i will need to re-read the first four <i>stormlight</i> books with a more critical eye.  i simply won't be able to banish the madness without another highlighter- & notebook-plagued romp across roshar.

rust & ruins, my poor stormin' soul '˙◠˙.
